---
    title: "Towards reducing chemical usage for weed control in agriculture using UAS imagery analysis and computer vision techniques"
    authors: ["Ranjan Sapkota", "John Stenger", "Michael Ostlie", "Paulo Flores"]
    year: 2025
    month: 11
    publication_venue: "Nature"
    abstract: "Currently, applying uniform distribution of chemical herbicide through a sprayer without considering the spatial distribution information of crops and weeds is the most common method of controlling weeds in commercial agricultural production system. This kind of weed management practice lead to excessive amounts of chemical herbicides being applied in a given field. The objective of this study was to perform site-specific weed control (SSWC) in a corn field by: (1) using a unmanned aerial system (UAS) to map the spatial distribution information of weeds in the field; (2) creating a prescription map based on the weed distribution map, and (3) spraying the field using the prescription map and a commercial size sprayer. In this study, we assumed that plants growing outside the corn rows are weeds and they need to be controlled. The first step in implementing such an approach is identifying the corn rows. For that, we are proposing a Crop Row Identification algorithm, a computer vision algorithm that identifies corn rows on UAS imagery. After being identified, the corn rows were then removed from the imagery and remaining vegetation fraction was classified as weeds. Based on that information, a grid-based weed prescription map was created and the weed control application was implemented through a commercial-size sprayer. The decision of spraying herbicides on a particular grid was based on the presence of weeds in that grid cell. All the grids that contained at least one weed were sprayed, while the grids free of weeds were not. Using our SSWC approach, we were able to save 26.2% of the acreage from being sprayed with herbicide compared to the current method. This study presents a full workflow from UAS image collection to field weed control implementation using a commercial size sprayer, and it shows that some level of savings can potentially be obtained even in a situation with high weed infestation, which might provide an opportunity to reduce chemical usage in corn production systems."
    tags: ["weed control"]
    published: true
    featured: false
    doi: "https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-023-33042-0"
    pdf_url: "https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-023-33042-0"
    code_url: "https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-023-33042-0"
    dataset_url: ""
    github_link: "https://github.com/ranzosap/ranjan.sapkota/articles/towards-reducing-chemical-usage-for-weed-control-in-agriculture-using-uas-imagery-analysis-and-computer-vision-techniques"
    ---

    Corn (Zea mays L.) is a major cereal crop that accounts for more than 95% of total feed grain production in the United States (US) and provides food, feed, and fuel for people and livestock worldwide1. The importance of corn lies not only in its high yield potential but also in its diverse uses, including as a source of starch, sweeteners, biofuels, and industrial products2,3. Corn is a staple food for many people, especially in developing countries, where it provides a significant portion of the daily calorie intake. In addition, corn is a vital component of animal feed, providing essential nutrients for livestock such as cattle, pigs, and poultry4. Moreover, corn has a significant role in the biofuel industry, where it is converted to ethanol and other biofuels5. This renewable energy source contributes to reducing greenhouse gas emissions and decreasing dependence on fossil fuels6. Corn cultivation also has numerous environmental benefits, such as reducing soil erosion and improving soil quality7. Given the importance of corn in food, feed, fuel, and industrial production, the sustainable and efficient management of corn cultivation is crucial for ensuring global food security, reducing greenhouse gas emissions, and promoting sustainable agriculture.

The current corn production system uses excessive amount of chemical herbicide for weed control. About 1 billion pounds of conventional pesticides are used each year to control undesirable vegetation such as weeds in the agricultural production system of the United States (U.S.), which amount to a cost of almost $9 billion8,9. One of the major reasons for excessive use of chemicals in agriculture is the conventional method of spraying herbicides for weed control, often called a blanket application, which accounts for 59% of the major pesticide expenditures in economic crops in North America10. The blanket application implies spraying herbicide uniformly across the field without considering the spatial distribution of the weeds, which often causes overuse of chemical herbicides.

Chemical herbicides are widely used in modern agriculture to control weeds, protect crop yields, and improve farming efficiency. Herbicides reduce competition for resources such as water, nutrients, and sunlight, promoting crop growth and leading to higher yields11. Additionally, they can prevent the spread of diseases and pests that may harm crops, thus improving food quality and safety12. However, overreliance on herbicides can have negative environmental consequences, such as contamination of soil and water resources and the development of herbicide-resistant weeds. In addition to being harmful to the environment13,14, chemical herbicides can be harmful to human health as they have been linked to cancer15, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)16, alzheimer’s17, DNA damage, cardiovascular diseases, neurological disorders, and reproductive disorders18. Moreover, excessive chemical use in agriculture has the potential to harm nervous system, endocrine system, and reproductive system of human19. Furthermore, excessive use of chemicals in agriculture have become one of the major reason for surface and groundwater pollution20,21,22,23, becoming a threat to the ecosystem and public health. Although organic farming is seen by many as a potential solution for the excessive use of chemicals in agriculture, it is not a silver bullet to meet the United Nations sustainable development goals by 203024. Therefore, to maintain environmental sustainability and human health, agricultural production systems are in dire need of technologies that can significantly reduce the amount of chemicals currently being used, without compromising crop yields.

An alternative way to neglect chemical use for weed control in agricultural production system is through physically removing weeds by using robotics platforms. Some of the latest automated robots such as the autonomous weed robot by “ecoRobotix” (ecoRobotix, Vaud, Switzerland) and “Deepfield Robotics” (Deepfield Robotics, Renningen, Germany), use ground-based machine vision and image processing techniques to perform site-specific weed control (SSWC) in row crops25. However, these robotic solutions are not effective to be deployed in a large commercial agricultural field (hundreds or thousands of acres). To overcome that issue, some companies have developed and commercialized solutions such as “Weedseeker
” (Trimble agriculture, California, USA), and “WEED-it” (WEED-IT, Steenderen, Netherlands), which use optoelectronic sensors to measure the reflection intensity of vegetation, allowing them to discriminate vegetation from soil background26. The shortfall of those products, at the time of this writing, is that they cannot discern weeds from crops early in growing to allow such technologies to be used for weed control. Recently, John Deere (Illinois, USA) launched See & Spray Ultimate
, a sprayer that enables detection and control of weeds during the growing season in corn, soybean, and cotton. More details regarding the field performance of that technology remain to be seen since the sprayers fitted with the system will be available only in 202327.

Another approach of performing SSWC is possible through the use of remote sensing technology to accurately map the weed distribution information across a field and integrate that with a spraying platform28. The main idea here is to spray herbicide only to those areas where weeds are present29. To accomplish that, one would need a high-resolution imagery to discern plants growing in the field as weeds and crop. Since satellite imagery would present some challenges to discern weeds from crops, due to its limitations in providing adequate spatial resolution30, the use of UAS with high-resolution cameras seems to be a promising platform, which can be processed and analyzed to obtain an accurate weed distribution map from a field31. For that approach to work, is imperative to detect weeds accurately early in the growing season. In most crop weed management programs, weed treatment is recommended at the early growth stages of both crops and weeds. Mapping weeds at that stage can be a challenging task because of four main reasons: (1) weeds are not uniformly distributed across the field, which necessitates working at a single pixel size on the image32, (2) crop and weeds have the same or similar reflectance properties, (3) interference of soil background33, and (4) very small size weeds which might not captured by camera34.

One of the earliest studies related to SSWC using UAS35 reported about the possibility of the use of UAS imagery and imagery analysis techniques to perform accurate discrimination between weeds and sunflower at early growth stages, which is key to implement any SSWC. More recently, the use of UAS in agriculture for SSWC have become a topic of several publications in specialized literature related to agriculture36,37,38,39,40,41,42,43,44. Around the same time, more sophisticated and powerful image analysis algorithms, such as machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) have being developed and adapted for agricultural applications, and they have gained space as effective ways to process large amounts of data in agriculture45,46.

Another study conducted by Peña et al.37 developed an object-based image analysis (OBIA) procedure to generate a weed map in an experimental maize field in Spain using a six-band multispectral camera. The OBIA procedure classified crop rows, discriminated crops and weeds based on their relative positions to crop rows, and generated a weed infestation map. The study achieved an accuracy of 86% in generating weed map, however, the study was limited to virtual simulation, and further field implementation is necessary to validate its effectiveness. Likewise, Hunter et al.47 investigated the efficiency and efficacy of an unmanned aerial vehicle integrated system (UAV-IS) for weed management compared to ground-based broadcast applications. The UAV-IS was found to be more efficient at identifying and treating target weedy areas while minimizing treatment on non-weedy areas. However, it treated 20–60% less area than the ground-based applications and missed up to 26% of the target weedy area. The study concludes that UAV-IS has the potential to improve integrated pest management programs and reduce herbicide resistance, but battery replacement issues need to be addressed for commercial farming use. Similarly, a recent study by Jensen et al.48 presented an approach for automated site-specific fallow weed management using unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) and precision spray technology. The system employs machine vision and GIS technology to detect and map green weeds, which are subsequently targeted for precision herbicide application. Although field evaluation of the system showed some herbicide savings, the accuracy varied for different weed species, and some species were even not identified with good accuracy. This suggests that the system may not be suitable for managing all weed species in fallow fields. Future work is needed to optimize the system’s efficiency and commercial viability.

Identification of crop rows in an UAS imagery using ML and DL have become another subject for several recent studies49,50,51,52,53,54,55,56,57,58. Although, most of these studies have been able to identify crop rows, and discriminate between weeds and crops during the early stage, they were limited to virtual simulations only. Most of these reports regarding the use of UAS imagery for SSWC fall short of providing a real word solution for SSWC, since most of them just report on the capability of different algorithms to separate weeds from crops. Moreover, most of these studies regarding crop row detection, were able to identify the rows as lines with great accuracy51,52,53,54,55,56,57,58, however, the authors could not provide any insights on how to use those detected crop rows in practical agriculture. Additionally, most of the reports are performed in a small area of agricultural land which would probably raise questions about the research validity in bigger agricultural area.

Corn is a major crop for the state of North Dakota (ND), US. In 2020, ND farmers grew corn in 1.5 million hectares of corn in ND59. Weed competition is a major cause of corn yield losses in ND, and chemical herbicide is the most widely used option for weed control60. In order to optimize weed control efficacy, the use of pre-and post-emergence chemical herbicide treatments has been proven to be the most effective weed control strategy61,62. At present, most of the farmers apply a blanket application of herbicides for post-emergence weed control in corn, with no consideration regarding the spatial distribution of weeds across the field. That application often results in an overuse of chemical herbicides. The cost of post-emergence herbicide application (product + application) in ND is usually around $8-12/ha (2020 growing season). If one could use UAS imagery to generate a weed distribution map, implement SSWC, and apply chemicals to only those areas where weeds are present in the field, that could lead to significant savings on chemicals for corn growers. Using the area grown with corn in 2020 in ND and the cost associated with the chemical application, those savings could reach as much as $5.5–7.5 million, with as little as a 10% reduction in applied acreage. In addition to the financial savings, there are environmental savings, which are harder to put a number to it, that can be realized using applying fewer chemicals to the land.

This research is embodying the following contributions, as no previous study has reported on the whole workflow, from image collection to weed control application in the field, to implement SSWC in corn by integrating UAS imagery with a commercial-size sprayer:

Development and validation of a Crop Row Identification (CRI) algorithm for UAS-based imagery to accurately identify corn rows.

Mapping of post-emergent weed infestation in the corn field and creation of a grid-based weed prescription map for site-specific weed control.

Integration and field implementation of the prescription map through a commercial-size sprayer.

To compare the amount of chemical herbicide applied using our proposed approach (SSWC) with a traditional herbicide application method.
    